it's the gut wall integrity and the
bacteria relationship
that determines your fate
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with the
legend dr stephen gundry he is a
best-selling author multiple times over
a world-renowned heart surgeon who has
done over 10 000 procedures including
heart transplants i might add this man
knows the human body and today we're
going to be talking about his new book
the energy paradox and dr gundry as i
was saying before we started rolling i
really love this book
and unfortunately
i have experience
with this but if you would give people
just like a quick encapsulation of what
the energy paradox is and why
you wrote it
so it's uh it's dedicated to people when
what to do when your get up and go has
got up and gone
and actually my impetus for writing it
was started pre coven
uh i was on my way to orange county to a
pbs
fundraiser
and i get a call on the phone on the way
down to orange county that
the person a young millennial who was
going to do the fundraiser with me
uh called in and said she didn't have it
in her
to come in today to uh to do the
fundraiser and i thought oh gosh
anything wrong i said no she's just you
know she's exhausted and she's tired she
just doesn't have it in her but don't
worry we got another person we'll be
fine
but
that phrase stuck with me for for days
afterwards that you know a millennial
would be calling in and saying i don't
have it in me
and i realized that
when i first started my restorative
medicine practice over 20 years ago
at least half the people i saw
would we would use a medical code a
diagnostic code called fatigue and
malaise
and
it never really and it always went away
and so it never really occurred to me
that i was you know treating an energy
problem but when she said that i said oh
my gosh you know i'm an energy doctor
all along and i need to tell people
what's going on so that was the impetus
for the book
all right so one of the things you go
into in the book
is around cellular energy and so and
mitochondria specifically and i've been
asked a lot about how i maintain my
energy levels you know whether it's
running a company or speaking or
whatever i once stood and answered
questions for 11 and a half hours um and
one of the questions was you know how
how do you generate the energy and my
answer was well the only real truthful
answer to that is it's at a cellular
level so it has to do with diet it has
to do with exercise and you do get some
benefit from psychological energy
but i had always been you know since my
sort of mid to early 20s i've been
working out i've been very conscious
about my diet and so it just sort of
felt second nature until during covid
probably i don't know this was maybe six
months ago now i started to get
psychotically fatigued brain fog just
like
so tired i i was like am i losing my
will to fight to live it was
really unnerving and i thought okay what
would you tell somebody if they were
asking you this question and i said well
my answer would be i don't know what's
going on with you but i promise it's
your diet and so i was like okay well if
that's true what's going on in your diet
and uh
for me i started thinking about the only
thing that i was eating a lot of was
this like pecan pudding
and it was delicious and i loved it the
most i can't even begin to tell you how
much i enjoyed this thing and
because it was like raw pecans and
everything i thought you know it can't
be that but it's the only thing ain't a
lot so let me cut it out and it changed
in like 48 hours it was surreal
so
i know the punch line because i've read
the book but walk people through how
it's possible that something i'm eating
simply by removing it could restore my
energy
yeah the i about eighty percent of the
patients i see now are autoimmune
disease patients who
have kind of been all over the country
all over the world and
have not gotten a resolution in their
autoimmune disease or they're on
immunosuppressant drugs they don't want
to be
and what we find
a hundred percent of the time and i can
assure you it's a hundred percent of the
time
that all these people suffer from leaky
gut
and or
you know intestinal permeability if you
want the exact term
twenty add
hundred which is just for people that
don't know it is
is literally the lining of our
intestines is the same surface area as a
tennis court we it's only one cell thick
right only one cell thick and the cells
are stuck together with what are called
tight junctions
so everything we eat including all the
bacteria that live in us
are only one cell away from
us from in
eighty percent of our immune system
white blood cells are sitting right
behind this wall
waiting for troublemakers to come
through and
your example is actually really good
hidden in one of my books the plant
paradox cookbook the original one
there's a little line that says pecans
have a very interesting lectin
and i can't tell you the number of
people who are sensitive to the lectin
and pecans particularly if you eat them
raw
so you
quite frankly undoubtedly are one of
those people who are sensitive to pecans
and these little
prot proteins lectins actually made your
gut porous
so so what well the whole book is
literally about that
your immune system requires huge amounts
of energy to do battle with whatever is
coming across
your border
and it really fast on that that was one
thing from the book that um
i was wondering is is there data coming
out because in the book you talk a lot
about the hudson tribe the studies that
are coming out how people compared
you've got the hot sun moving around all
the time hunting and gathering and then
you've got somebody sitting at their
desk and when you measure the energy
output of those two people you would
think the sedentary person was way lower
in energy output but they're actually
the same
now is it just your hunch that that
isn't true or is there actual data
around the um the sort of energy
requirements of the
um
inflammation basically
i'll use a great pre-covered example
that i use in the book
you catch the flu the and everybody
gets really achy you feel awful you
don't want to move
you don't want to read you don't want to
think you just want to you know binge
watch netflix laying in your bed
and everybody says well yeah of course
that's the flu virus the flu virus is
causing that to happen and in fact it
isn't
there's nothing in a flu virus to do
that but our immune system
recognizes the flu virus as a
troublemaker
and mobilizes the troops and the troops
if you will require huge amounts of fuel
so we
ration fuel to energy-hungry mussels
and we ration fuel to that energy hub we
brain
how do we ration fuel the muscles we
make muscles hurt so that it doesn't
feel good to move
how do we ration fuel to the brain we
make the brain
not work
and so your immune system takes all this
fuel for the fight
and it's fascinating to see that you
know what we thought was the flu virus
causing the problem in fact is our own
immune system saying
you
lay back sit down for the count i need
all this energy and in fact that's
i think and other data shows that that's
what happened to these sedentary workers
their energy
expense was just the same as if they
were walking 10 miles a day but they
were burning the fuel of inflammation
the fire of inflammation as i call it
yeah one thing that
um you know sort of bringing these
pieces together
in my own life my wife went through a
really brutal
gut problem many years ago which
frequent listeners of this podcast will
have heard many many times
and i remember she used to say
it it just feels like my gut is inflamed
it feels like my gut is inflamed and i
had heard people talk about that the
immune system is right there and i was
like why would the immune system be in
the gut that seems so bizarre and then
when you think okay well if that
junction breaks something gets in now
the body has to go crazy you really are
inflaming that whole area
now the question becomes is that what's
causing the fatigue or like the just the
energy reallocation or is this something
that has to do with leaky brain and
foreign substances are getting into the
brain that cause like that brain fog
like how does this all
um begin to manifest the symptoms
yeah that's you're exactly right number
one
it's enough in and of itself to steal
enough energy to have to be tired but i
think more importantly we're now
realizing for the most part if you have
leaky gut
you will have a leaky brain in in one of
two potential ways and i outlined them
in the book
one which is probably the most
frightening is that we have a blood
brain barrier which is a single set of
cells that keeps really anything in your
bloodstream
away from your brain which is kind of a
sacred space it's it's so sacred that
let's suppose you get a brain tumor
or you get an infection in your brain we
can't give you chemotherapy through your
veins
and it will won't get in your brain we
can't give you antibiotics through your
veins and it won't get into your brain
it's that protected
yet what we're now able to do with
blood tests is actually
find disruption of the blood-brain
barrier
and number two we actually see
inflammation in the brain itself
particularly with these
secret service protecting agents of the
brain the microglia they are actually
the immune system of the brain
and they're
they're handlers for the neurons which
are the real important cells of the
brain and the microglia are you know the
bodyguards the handlers
and if the microglia sense that there's
problems in the gut
that already there's
lack of a better word an army that's
penetrated our borders
that the army will soon be up to the
brain
the microglia actually cause neuro
inflammation and literally begin to
create
preemptively
here's
as i talked about in the book
neurons send out these dendrites to talk
to other neurons very much like
an airport as a central terminal and
then satellites where you go out to
catch the planes
think of the neuron as the central
terminal and the satellites are where
you're going to catch plane or talk to
another neuron
if the microglia think that an attack is
imminent they go oh my gosh we got
call the guys back from the satellites
so since the dendrites are actually how
we talk to another nerve how we think
how we create memory
imagine if microglia are actively
popping these guys you know away
no wonder we have brain fog and
you know it was something
so you're 80 years old and you don't
think as clear as you did when you were
30 and we go yeah you're 80 years old
that's okay
but now we have 30 year old women
particularly who have brain fog
and so many times their physician go oh
you're a young mother you have two kids
um you know you're not getting enough
sleep of course you have brain fog
but when we see these people because
they're not getting any better and we
actually do these tests
they light up you know their blood-brain
barrier with all these inflammatory
markers and we see this
neural inflammation that we can now
measure this morning i saw a 48 year old
woman
who
has parkinson's disease 48 years old
yeah healthy is a horse you know
kind of out of the blue after
it started after a funny viral illness a
couple years ago but long story short
we've been working with her for about
six months and i saw her back for her
visit
and when we first checked her she had
not only leaky gut she had markers for
an autoimmune disease lupus
anti-nuclear antibody
and she had leaky brain and she actually
had an attack on the movement center of
her brain
anti-cerebellum antibodies
and we're going well no wonder you know
you got this
let's get after this
and
we've now been six months each time we
check her
her leaky gut is better and better it's
about
halfway to where we want her
her autoimmune markers are gone
her leaky brain is about half of what it
was when we started and her
anti-cerebellar marker is pretty much
gone still mildly positive
and so you can kind of track what's
happened to her by looking at how leaky
your gut is and
we've gone through what she's sensitive
to and
some really healthy foods she's
sensitive to like you were sensitive to
a really healthy food
and once you get a leaky gut
even what would normally be a healthy
food
if it can get past
this leak your immune system says hey
wait a minute
this isn't supposed to be in here in
this form it's supposed to be digested
and what are you doing there and it
literally makes an antibody just like if
you got a shot for covet
you made an antibody to the spike
protein in in coven
so we make
an antibody to
pecans and it's like what what the heck
so every time you eat pecans your immune
system goes wow you know we've got a
we've got to summon the troops this is
awful we got to take all the energy to
help fort tom
so now let's walk people through step by
step because we haven't even gotten to
mitochondria in detail yet which we'll
get there in a minute it's such an
important part of this story but so
first i want to
begin to help people to understand what
it is that breaks the junction in their
gut because that's such a huge part of
this uh
what is it that triggers the breakdown
let's start with that
well so
there's there's three kind of major
components so first of all
and we don't need to talk about this
extensively but lectins are
plants read the plant paradox
they're plant proteins that were
designed by plants to protect themselves
and their seeds their babies from being
eaten by making their predator
ill to pay attention
number two
particularly if we're eating a typical
american diet with lots of saturated
fats
lots of fats in general and lots of
sugars
we
in our gut have
classes of bacteria and we have 10 000
different bacteria
and i divide them into gut buddies
good bacteria and gang members
gang members love
saturated fats and simple sugars
and the problem with these gang members
is that they
divide and die
and pieces of these bacteria called
lps's lipopolysaccharides
and
in all my books i call them little
pieces of because that's literally
what they are
these guys actually hop on
fat molecules
and ride through our gut even without a
leaky gut
and when they get to the other side the
immune system cannot tell the difference
between a living bacteria and a
bacterial cell wall
it's so impressive that for instance we
could take you or me
and inject these lps's into our
bloodstream
and both of us would go into septic
shock as if living bacteria had been put
into us so
believe it or not in the american diet
24 hours a day
were causing leaky gut we're assaulting
our immune system with these lps's
and it's no wonder that just from fat we
all you know are just a giant ball of
inflammation
okay so um for my own sake it'll be
interesting to tease out some of the
ideas around fat but first i want to
stay on this point just for a second of
how people end up getting in a state
where they're prone to having that
junction break so i'm going to make some
assertations you tell me or assertions
you tell me if these are correct
assertions or not
so
one that
part of the problem is a breakdown in
the actual microbiome so the integrity
of a well-balanced microbiome so you've
probably done something to assault that
microbiome for a long time it could be a
very non-diverse diet so some of the
bugs are just dying out and so because
they're starved to death
and so you get you know some dysbiosis
there you've got people just shoveling
sugar in their face that comes in a
gazillion different forms that causes
all kinds of havoc not only in the
microbiome but elsewhere and you know
we'll get into some of the other
ramifications i'm sure later um
antibiotics which are causing that
glyphosate which is causing that so it's
like there are so many things that are
assaulting our guts and the reason i'm
i'm prefacing all of this is because one
thing that i've had tremendous success
with in my life is high fat low carb so
i'm curious to see like it
in my n of one experience
fat of certain kinds anyway do not seem
to be problematic and of one i'm well
aware of that so you know everybody
freaking out that that is not empirical
data i understand um but you know
there's also obviously a pretty
interesting carnivore movement um so is
it certain types of fat is it only fat
when you've compromised your microbiome
or is it no no fat is in and of itself
an assault upon even a healthy
microbiome
so i'm i'm the guy who's famous for
saying the only purpose of food is to
get olive oil in your mouth so i'm
absolutely not anti-fat
and in all my books i have a
ketogenic plant paradox chapter of
exactly that
but having said that interestingly
enough
most fats even including olive oil are
transported across the wall of our gut
using these
carriers called chylomicrons
and it's the kylomicrons that these
lps's hop onto
so interesting are the chylomicrons a
metabolite of some kind no chylomicrons
are the
moving van that literally carries fat
across your gut wall
fat transverses your gut wall in a
totally different way than sugars or
proteins
the exception to that
is medium chain triglycerides
now medium chain triglycerides mct oil
are a saturated fat but they are a
unique saturated fat in that they're
water soluble
so they transverse the gut wall without
kylomicrons number one
and they don't enter our lymphatic
system where kylomicrons go they go
directly from our gut through our portal
vein into our liver
and in the liver mcts actually
tell the liver to make ketone bodies
so whenever you eat mct oil or eat mcts
in other forms
you will automatically do not stop do
not pass go do not collect 200 you will
automatically make ketones in your liver
and they'll be released let me
understand the difference then so if if
not all fats are bad
what are the fats that are bad that are
causing this problem i didn't i didn't
get that
so
sadly a lot of the saturated animal fats
are some of the biggest mischief makers
but
the other specifically because they're
feeding the wrong bacteria they're
feeding the wrong bacteria and if you
don't have these gram-negative bacteria
in your gut in huge amounts
you will not produce
lps's lipopolysaccharides
so you could have
a very high-fat diet as long as you
don't have these gang members
in your in your life and those gang
members got there quite frankly by
eating a lot of sugar so help me then
understand so um there you said there is
a time for a carnivore diet i'm guessing
there's a
pretty narrow band where you would
recommend that but what would that
narrow band be
so we we will use it uh for an
elimination diet where we've got someone
who is
really intolerant to
plant lectins in general and we do see
these people
they're
totally intolerant to raw plants
most of the time
the lectins in plants can be cooked away
there are exceptions beans you cannot
cook the lectins away
wheat you cannot cook lectins away you
can't pressure cook wheat to get rid of
the lectins oats have a
molecule that mimics gluten
corn has virtually identical molecules
to
gluten in fact 70 of people who are
sensitive of gluten react to corn as if
it was wheat and
so many patients yeah so many patients
that i see on a gluten-free diet
for
celiac disease for extreme leaky gut
they're eating corn because it's gluten
free
and when we take corn away from them so
many of them resolve the problem and you
know it's like oh my gosh you know i've
been eating corn chips and corn muffins
and cornbread and i thought that was you
know gluten-free well it is but it
cross-reacts so
if you
if you combine a carnivore diet
with
what i recommend in the book which is
time restricted eating
or compressing your eating window
you can i want to say get away with a
carnivore diet for a period of time
there's a very famous young lady who
follows a carnivore diet who
really wants to get off the carnivore
diet but you can't
and i think
we've seen this and if we were gonna
really simplify why she can't
i'm guessing it's it is simply a
question of the microbiome right like if
we could uh repopulate her microbiome
whether through fecal microbial
transplant or magic whatever but if we
could repopulate her gut
then theoretically she would be able to
get off it the only reason that people
get trapped in something like that is
because of the changes in their
microbiome
yes
one of the things that i um i think is
critically important for our health in
so many ways that i talk about in the
energy paradox
is we now know that the the microbiome
number one has to be diverse we know
that the western diet produces the worst
kind of
non-diverse microbiome that you could
possibly you know wish for and you don't
wish for that that's number one number
two if you don't give the microbiome
plant fibers
which are
prebiotic fibers these are soluble
fibers that we can't digest but the
microbiome eats
the microbiome can't produce what are
called
postbiotics and i spend a lot of time in
the book
talking about this exciting discovery of
postbiotic
yeah help me understand what the
difference between a postbiotic and a
metabolite is
okay so
literally when
bacteria ferment
fibers
then they
the fermentation process produces
both
short chain fatty acids like butyrate
like acetate like proprionate
and they produce a series of gases
hydrogen gas hydrogen sulfide gas the
rotten egg smell methane carbon dioxide
nitric oxide
we used to think that these were just
farts that everybody made and they
didn't do anything
but about 10 years ago i usually present
a talk at the
world congress of microbiota which is
which happens in paris
before coven
and the organizers professor from paris
dr marvin edis
he pulled me aside about eight years ago
and he says you know
the microbiome talks to mitochondria
and i'm going
well that's interesting how do you know
that he says well it has to because
mitochondria the little energy producing
organelles in all of our cells are
actually engulfed bacteria
and the bacteria of the microbiome talk
to their sisters and they control what
happens to the mitochondria they either
tell them to produce energy or things
are bad in the engine room cut back on
energy production i'm going well this is
fascinating but why hasn't anybody
discovered this he said you watch
we will
and sure enough he was right so we now
know that these they're now called
postbiotics
the gases are called gaso messengers
or gaso transmitters
and the short chain fatty acids we now
know
nourish the gut wall number one and also
nourish brain cells number two
so
the discovery of this language and it's
literally called a trans kingdom
language
where
seda bacteria
talk to
us in particular our mitochondria
and it won the nobel prize for medicine
a few years ago with the discovery is it
specifically the gas or is it the gas
and the postbiotic so the gas is a
postbiotic
so okay are the short the short chain
fatty acids considered biotic correct
okay yeah they're all classified what do
they do is it is uh hey nitric oxide has
arrived therefore do this and the flip
side nitric oxide has not arrived and
therefore do
that correct
so for instance we know that
hydrogen sulfide the rotten egg smell
if you produce the right amount of
hydrogen sulfide
you will not produce
atherosclerotic disease plaque in
coronary arteries despite a monstrously
high level of cholesterol in the diet
but if you don't produce the right
amount of hydrogen sulfide
it's as if
you know
let the
hell loose from
[Music]
ldl hold on
that sounds like a life-changing uh
revelation i've never heard that before
so i can have freakishly high
uh
cholesterol but if i get the right
signal from the
my microbiome
in the form of gas
then my body's like we're good we're not
going to form the the
sclerotic plaque that's like the hardest
word in the english language
that's crazy why are people not talking
about that
because there's no money in it you know
as statin drugs or
make a lot of money um
you know and this is you know when i
look back at the man who changed my life
25 years ago big ed
and watched him clean out the you know
inoperable plaque in his coronary
arteries
did you see him under the knife or was
he uh
not surgical so yeah interesting enough
he had so much plaque in all his blood
vessels you couldn't put stents in them
you couldn't
do bypasses because there wasn't any
place to land and like so many people he
would go around the country looking for
idiots like me
to operate on him to take him on that's
kind of what i did
and he spent six months going to major
centers and i've named them before
and everybody turned him down said yup
go away nothing we can do for you well
during the six months he went on a diet
and he started taking a bunch of
supplements from a health food store and
he lost 45 pounds in six months now he
was still big guy i call him big head
because he was 265 when i met him so he
arrives in my office carrying his
angiogram the cardiac catheterization
from six months previous and i look at
it and i go you know everybody's right
nothing we can do for you
you know sorry and he says wait a minute
you know look i've been on a diet i'm
taking all these supplements maybe i did
something
and i said well you know good for you
for losing weight but that's not going
to do anything in here he says look what
have we got to lose let's do another
angiogram and
i said okay so in six months that's
putting a camera in his veins yeah it's
doing putting dye in his veins and
taking a 3d picture of where the
blockages are and in six months time
of the blockages are now gone now we
still got blockages but now there's open
spaces
where i could land a bypass so
if i knew what i knew now
i'd say
great job
see ya in six months they'll probably be
all cleaned out but i didn't know that
so i said great you know we're gonna do
an operation on you and we did a five
vessel bypass and i'm pretty smart
and then i said um tell me about this
diet and let me look at those
supplements
and son of a gun this guy had actually
put himself on a diet with that was my
thesis as an undergraduate yale on what
turned a great ape into a human being
and i was so
shocked that you know this guy did this
that i put myself on my thesis and i
lost 70 pounds i was a big fat art
surgeon even always running 30 miles a
week and going to the gym one hour a day
so that's a long way of saying
that he actually was the guy who opened
my eyes
that
we've got this all wrong
yeah it's it's bananas man every time i
talk to you i mean you forget your book
which is already just chock full of
enlightening things but
that that's really crazy so you say in
the book you make a prediction that in
the future we're going to realize
a couple things one you say that you
refer to the gut as the first brain and
not the second brain but the other thing
is this gut gas
brain
and i've never heard anybody talk about
it before and just to re-anchor
everybody we're talking about energy and
your body's ability to generate energy
and you've got your gut which is far
more complicated than anybody could
possibly realize
it's communicating to the organs
inside your cell or the organelles
inside your cells that generate the
actual energy that are themselves
bacteria that have their own dna which
is fascinating unto itself
and all of this then is also
having an effect i won't just say
communicating because i think it's more
than that having an effect on the brain
which is then having
massive
effects whether it's fatigue whether
it's the the fogginess which was the
worst part of what i went through so you
just blew my mind with the whole gas
communication thing and how it can even
play out with plaque
now mitochondria
we have to talk about the the idea of um
the the traffic jam that ends up
happening
i think it's really important for people
you've already mentioned time restricted
but now talk to me in in the context of
that traffic jam because this to me was
a big player in why you feel lethargic
if you feel like you're lacking energy
yeah so mitochondria produce energy from
either glucose which comes from the
carbohydrates we eat or amino acids
proteins that we eat or from free fatty
acids fats that we eat or that we have
stored that we produce
and normally mitochondria use one of
those substances at a time
and quite frankly if we actually ate
whole foods like i talked in the book
like our great-grandparents did
normally carbohydrates sugar molecules
would arrive first for processing and
mitochondria are really good at using
one thing at a time
then after the carbohydrates are gone
protein takes a long time to digest into
amino acids and they arrive second
fat literally takes a circuitous route
it's not even absorbed into our
bloodstream it's absorbed into our lymph
system
and then comes around later but what's
happened with our processed foods and
our ultra processed foods
is that we have had made
perfect pre-digested
sugar amino acids and small fat
molecules
that literally
instantaneously enter our bloodstream
and wham
into our mitochondria simultaneously
and it's literally
since both of us live in the la area it
is like rush hour traffic in l.a with
all of these
streets leading into our freeways
and nothing moves
and what we're doing now the average
american worked by sachin panda at the
salk institute in san diego to show that
the average american is eating for 16
hours a day
and 60 percent of the food we eat is
processed
so we're just
constant in rush hour it's like the 405
24 hours a day as you and i know and
nothing moves so if we look at energy
production as literally cars moving down
through a freeway
it's no wonder that even though we're
eating huge amounts of calories
we have no energy because we literally
log jammed the mitochondria and just as
a fun
side note the first pre-digested food
that was actually advertised as a
benefit was kellog's corn flakes it was
actually advertised as the first
predicts digested food
and why anybody would want to have their
food pre-digested like most of our food
is now
you can thank kellogg's for doing that
over a hundred years ago
yeah okay now in the last um
few minutes that we have
walk people through
what do they do like how do you right
now you have it you're me pre-realizing
that i'm eating something i shouldn't be
eating how do they rebuild back better
and stronger than ever you talk about
you know these 80 year olds that you
know are charging up hills and
um you know aren't thinking
fatigue they're just they're ready to
rock how do we get anybody there at any
age
so uh i had the pleasure of knowing jack
lalanne uh in his later years and
um jacqueline was the godfather of
fitness in my humble opinion you might
think that too but jacqueline says used
to say if it tastes good spit it out
now he wasn't saying that just because
don't eat you know tasty food
what he was saying is look you've got to
eat for your gut microbiome
first and you have to choose foods that
they want to eat and if you do that
they will take care of you and i spent
the longevity paradox book explaining
why if you want to be a 90 year old
charging up a hill in sardinia
you got to take care of your gut
microbiome because you're actually their
home and
again in a very weird way we have to get
over the fact that this complex organism
may in the end be totally dependent on
single one cell creatures that live in
our gut
and you know it it really knocks you
down a notch to think that maybe i'm
here for them
but all the available evidence is that
we
die
we get diseases
by breaks in the wall of our gut that
start this process just like a poverty
said 2500 years ago and he doesn't have
the sophisticated
tests that we have to prove it but the
guy was right and you can do this in
animal models you can do this in worms
and it's the gut wall integrity and the
bacteria relationship
that determines your fate so eat for
them that number one number two
you gotta eat for your mitochondria you
cannot overload them 24 hours a day they
actually have to have down time and the
more downtime they have the more repair
work they do and they will actually make
more energy and it's a paradox
if you
begin to gradually restrict the time you
eat down to about six to eight hours a
day
you will develop
much better functioning mitochondria
you'll actually have a better gut wall
because you're not working on digestion
24 hours a day
and you're going to protect your brain
dr dale bredesen and i who he wrote the
end of alzheimer's have become friends
through the years
and dr bredesen says look if you want to
protect your brain
restrict your eating hours down to about
six to eight hours a day and it's the
number one thing you can do to protect
your brain
by restricting your eating it's like
really
wow okay so this is extraordinary when
you take your um the three paradox books
that you've written together you really
get a pretty holistic picture of what is
going on i'm super excited so obviously
people can find your book on amazon
wherever books are sold uh
how else can they stay in contact with
you
so uh come to the dr gundry podcast um
you can get it wherever you find your
podcast we're part of podcast one now so
we're readily available uh
please visit me at drgundry.com
or
gundrymd.com my supplement and food
company
i'm on twitter i'm on instagram i have
two youtube channels i we do recipes i
cook
just in another recipe this week so
um
and hopefully i appear on your email
visiting you every day so
nice
awesome well thank you so much for
joining me this was really wonderful and
guys i'm telling you this stuff is so
important there are a few things that
have had a bigger impact on my life than
diet for the most part it's been uh the
amplitude of effect was bad because of
what lisa went through
but it is
such a key component once you get it
down how good you feel and
dr gundry talks about that in the book
that there's nothing that tastes as good
as feeling alert and energetic feels
so keep that in mind it really is a game
changer and speaking of game changers if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be
legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you